So welcome to the first of our two page ph challenges.
This is the smaller of the two.
But it should give you an opportunity to practice pretty much everything that we've covered especially
the post variables and sending e-mails and ph.
And it will also use our bootstrap skills and a little bit of Jey query as well.
So this is what we're after.
We want a nice looking bootstrap based contact form.
We want a nice bootstrap based form which asks for the user's e-mail address the subject of the message
and the content of their message.
We then want some jay query validation.
So if we try and submit the form incorrectly it gets us messages telling us what we need to fix and
then if we submit the form supposedly correctly at least as far as the computer can tell then it sends
the message and we're actually doing ph P server side validation as well.
So we're checking that the email address is valid.
We're checking the subject and content are there.
The e-mail address is there as well.
And that's important because you can't just do javascript validation because someone may have javascript
turned off for example or be posting to your form directly and then you do need to validate on the server
side with HP as well.
So that's it.
You've definitely got almost all those skills that just a couple of small bits that we haven't covered.
But you can definitely get those with a very quick bit of googling.
So as always give it a good go yourself.
And then I'll go through it afterwards.
Best of luck.
All right.
I've got one well I'm going to start by getting our boot strap templates which I'm going to find by
searching for P-trap for.
And that takes me to this page.
It will take you to a different page if bootstrap is in a later version by the time you're watching
this course.
And then I'm going to click download bootstrap and introduction
and then find the starter template
and we get.
So let's just save that and make sure we've got something that looks bootstrapping.
There it is wonderful.
So let's pop that into a container div
and we'll change the H-1 see
get in touch.
Wonderful.
Now we're going to want a bootstrap form.
So I'm going to go back over to bootstrap and find the form which is under components
and then we get and we'll copy and paste the code of the most similar form that we're after.
That's that top one should work just fine.
And there's no shame in copying and pasting.
In fact you're less likely to make mistakes or forget things.
If you copy and paste from templates as long as you remain.
Remember to update all of the code to what you need.
That's absolutely fine.
All right let's see.
So there's our very nice looking form rather more than we need.
So let's start customizing it.
So we're going to keep this form pretty simple.
We're going to need an email address a subject line and then a text area for them to put the main content
of what they want to get in touch about.
So I'm going see
Keep the email address and the password which will become our subject line and then we'll get rid of
the selects and everything up to the textarea will keep the text area
and then we'll get rid of everything else.
All the way down to the submit button.
So let's have a look at that should be a bit more manageable.
That looks great.
So that first one I want to get rid of all of the examples.
So I'm just going to call this email and we'll leave that as it is ID.
It's going to be email
and I'm just going to change that to enter your email address.
We'll leave.
They will never share your email with anyone else that's generally a good idea.
To say that and then
I'll change password to subject.
And this is going to be a subject and the type now is just text with an ID of subject.
And I think we won't have a placeholder for that one
let's have a look.
Exham
and for the label for the textarea
Well that's something like what would you'd like to ask us something like that and I'll call that content.
And three raise is fine.
There we go.
So that's all looking Now let's add a little bit of validation.
So the on the javascript side the email address will already be validated that's taken care of within
the bootstrap.
But we want to insist upon the subject and the content fields to be filled in.
So let's add an ID to our button
we'll just call it submit and then we want to run some query ran when the button is clicked.
So I'll add that down here underneath the bootstrap and Jay query.
So we'll have a script with a type of text slash Javascript.
So at the moment when we click the submit button it of course submit the form and we want to stop that
happening so that we can do our validation and then submit the form manually.
If it passes the validation.
So we haven't done that before.
So let's do a quick google something like Stop form submitting query
OK so we could look at the Submit API documentation.
I think this second route is going to be quick and I stopped form submitting using Jay Querrey Caylus
have a look.
Aha.
So what we've got here.
It's selecting the form and then it's doing something on submit and then we've got this function either
prevent default which stops it from submitting the form.
So that looks like it's perfect from our point of view.
So let's just add in the close parentheses them and then let's take a look if we now submit you can
see it's not refreshing the page.
So now let's do our validation and we'll do that in just the same way that we did before.
So we'll set the error string initially to an empty string and then we'll check for the values of the
subject and content fields.
And if they're empty then we'll add to the error string.
So if
subject failed to that dollar and then subjects that gets the subject field we want to get the value
of the subject field.
And we want to check to see if that's equal to an empty string if it's empty.
And if it is we want to append to the error string so we can do that with either error plus equals or
error equals error plus and then something plus equals is a little bit neater.
So we'll get to that one and we'll have something like the subject field is required
and then I'll do the same for content.
In a moment.
But I want to check that it's all working properly fast.
So let's add an empty area.
Dave
which is where we're going to contain our era and then we'll select that
just like that.
And then we want to set the HVM of the narrative to our
guess.
OK so let's just check see if that works.
Excellent subject what is required.
And if there is a subject then that becomes empty.
William.
So let's just copy and paste all of that because it's very similar for the content div.
So you just change subjects to content
and then just change the error message as well to the content filter is required.
Let's have a look.
Excellent.
OK.
Now that's nice.
But I think we can make it even nicer by using the bootstrap alerts.
So let's go back to bootstrap and find those alerts in the documentation and component's and there we
get there let's say it's perfect for this sort of thing.
I think a danger alert that right one at the bottom there would be perfect for us
OK.
So we want to surround our error message with these live classes.
So what we'll do is we'll check first of to see if there is an error message.
So if the error message if the error variable is not empty
then we don't just want to set the team to error.
We want to set the HVM to
a string with the error message in the middle.
So first off there's our string.
Now one issue we might have here is that it's going over several lines
which is not great for javascript because that will think that it's the end of the command and second
unit is of used single quotes to define our div text and that's because there are double quotes inside
the div itself.
So if I try and use double quotes then you will see that it expects this to be the end of the string
which of course is not the other option there is to use backslash as we have seen earlier on in the
course and that is a way of saying that we actually want to include this double quote in our string.
It's not the end of the string but I think it's simpler to just use single quotes around the edge and
then double quotes in the middle.
OK.
So now let's add some text to this.
We can say there were errors either one or two in your form and then
we can include the error message
that we get.
So we've now got the alert div content which should make it look a bit prettier.
Let's have a look.
So here we go.
If I put nothing in there we go.
So that's a much clearer and prettier way of showing the user's error messages.
I think one thing I might alter slightly is just the layout of them because I don't like that these
are two separated.
So I think what I'll try is putting the strong error message inside paragraph tags and then just using
B are to separate these two.
So I put a B R in there.
We don't need one at the end of the second one so let's have a look.
There we go.
I think that's a little bit each of them what we had before.
You can of course play with the spacings and margins or paddings if you want to.
Great.
So now we want to submit the form if there are no errors.
So how do we do that.
Let's go back to our
Jay query form submitting a question that we looked at on stack overflow because that was doing exactly
what we want to do.
Let's see if we can figure it out from this answer.
And now looking at the bottom of this answer I think we've got what I need just here.
So this does quite an interesting thing.
We have seen the bind command before.
But the problem that we have is if we just submit the form then that's going to go through this whole
validation again.
This is going to become recursive and it will never actually do the submission.
So what we actually need to do is unbind the function that we've attached to the Submit of that form
and then submit it.
So we're basically saying don't do the validation any more because we've already done it once.
But do the normal form submission so let's grab that and pop it in just so unbinding the submit would
still work with single quotes but I like to have everything the same.
So let's have a look.
So let's just put in a subject.
OK great.
That works fine if we put in content as well.
Then the form gets submitted.
At least it looks like it does.
Wonderful one slideshow.
You may have noticed is that if the user leaves the email address blank then we don't get the Jaker
validation.
So we do actually need to check to see if there's an e-mail address as well.
So that's easy enough.
We just
change that so that we're now checking for e-mail as well.
Curlers have a look.
Soon after we put in subject and content still hasn't work because we still need the email field.
So then we put a full e-mail that doesn't work.
So we really have to be pretty on our game and actually fill everything in correctly to get a submission
that we gay rights and that were done on the javascript and Jay queery front.
So now it's time to process our ph.
So I'm going to do that as usual at the very top of our script.
And we'll start by just displaying the post variables.
So let's see.
Now interestingly you see we've got an empty array here.
There is a good reason for that.
And that is even though we've given these inputs IDs we haven't given them names.
And it's actually the name that is passed through to the post variable on the server.
So we need to go through and just give them
the same name as the ID.
And just before we test that we'll also need to change the form method to post.
Otherwise we won't see anything OK.
So let's reload that page and then put in some dummy content and take a look.
There we go.
All right.
Now that we've got our demo content we need to do our server side validation as well.
It might seem like overkill but you definitely shouldn't rely just on Javascript validation because
someone could easily have the javascript turned off or they might post your script in some other way.
So you should definitely do server side validation as well as the javascript stuff so that we need to
set up in much the same way as we did before.
So we'll do a check first off see if there are any post variables.
Then we'll set our error to an empty string
or checked to see if the e-mail address is empty.
And there's actually quite an easy way to do that in Page Pate we can put an exclamation mark in front
of it so that checks to see either if there's no e-mail post variable at all or that the POST variable
is empty.
So then we'll append to error using Dopp this time rather than Plus because we're in HP
we'll have an email address is required.
And again we'll have PR as well.
And then we'll do the same
for
content
the content field is required.
And for subject
and it we be worth validating the email address again as well.
Let's see if we can find a way to do that.
We've validated an e-mail address in Jay queery before but this looks pretty perfect.
Validate email filter that we get.
So we've actually got a built in function in HP to do that.
We don't have to create the nasty validation string that we did in Jey query.
So let's pop this in here.
So the e-mail address that we're validating is the post email
we only care if it's not valid.
So we take away this exclamation mark then I should check to see if the filter is false and therefore
it's not valid.
There we go.
So we don't just want to echo that error.
We want to add it to the error string.
So the e-mail address is in valid OK.
And then we want to do something very similar to what we did here.
If there's an error message then we want to create some HVM al
say if every string is no longer empty then this is the bit that we need to essentially copy and paste
what we'll do is we'll take our and we'll set it equal say all of that.
Let's do this properly.
That is and close the command.
Now we've got our complete error.
Now how do we get that onto our page.
Well it actually carries down this variable throughout the script.
So what we can do is right here in our area Dave we can just echo era
if it's empty it won't echo anything which is fine but if there's an error then it will display it there.
OK just to check this out.
I'm just going to temporarily cut the code from the script.
So that we can stop the Java JavaScript validation and trap the page validation.
We all notice an undefined variable there.
It's not an error but it is a notice so we get to fix it.
And that's because I've only created my error variable.
If there's a post so if I define it either way then that notice should go away.
Great.
OK so let's just put some content in them and then submit then.
Excellent.
The required subject is required.
And the e-mail address is invalid.
Now that is not entirely true.
They didn't put in an e-mail address so it's not quite invalid.
So I think we'll just add this to check if
there is an email address and it's doesn't pass the validation then it's invalid so let's resubmit that
everywhere.
So we get an e-mail address is required but we don't get it's invalid if it's not OK.
We're getting close.
So we've now got our server side and our client side validation in place.
You might wonder why we need the javascript validation if we're going to do the service validation anyway.
The simple reason is it makes our script a bit nicer to use.
So they don't have to wait for the form to submit the page to reload to get the error message.
So now that we've got all our validation all that remains is to send out a form so we're going to do
this if there's no error message.
And let's set all the variables as necessary.
So email t.
That's just going to be me at my domain dot come
subject.
I was say equal say the subject the user entered
content.
Again all set equal say
the content of the user entered and the headers you remember from and also equal to the users e-mail.
That means that when this email pops up in your mailbox you'll be able to reply to it straight away
to get back to the customer or user or whoever they are.
And then
we'll try and send it say mail email to subject content heddes
and if that works what we want to have a success message.
So let's have
success message is you could say it's going to be very similar to this except instead of a danger we're
going to have a success.
So it's nice and green.
I must say something like your message was sent.
We'll get back to you.
Yes.
And notice we've got a single quote in there so I'm going to put a backslash in to escape that.
So it means it will just be displayed rather than think of it as the end of the string.
And then what we can do is just display success message along with the error message
because we're never going to get both once either it's going to be successful or it's not
of course there's the option that it won't work.
So in this case we'll have an error message.
I'll just have something generic like your message couldn't be sent.
Please try again later.
And again a backslash then OK.
So let's have a look.
Well just refresh that's what we call an undefined variable again.
Yep.
So we'll need to just make a success message
an empty string there as well.
OK.
So let's put our generic information in and take a look.
Wonderful message was sent.
We'll get back to you ASAP.
And just to check that's the area here would work.
Let's resubmit that and.
Excellent.
So the message couldn't be sent info is being sent there as well.
I think that's a little bit too dark.
Let's get rid of the Strongs.
Wonderful.
So that's as far as we're going to go with this.
There's a lot more that you could do with a contact phone.
But this has got the basics up and running.
And that brings us more or less to the end of the HP section of this course except of course for our
big picture challenge where we're going to be making a weather web app.
We'll see that in the next video.
Actually before we finish I just want to show you one slight issue with the script in its current form.
If you've tried it out you may notice that once we get everything right we actually have to press the
submit button twice.
So once there and then again to submit it that's obviously not a great solution.
So I'm going to show you a different way of submitting and not submitting the form which doesn't have
that problem.
So first off let's get rid of our unbinding and then submitting.
I'm also going to get rid of the prevent default and all we're going to do is we're going to have the
code return false if there is an error and return false.
It's essentially the javascript way of saying in this case something's gone wrong.
So we don't want to submit the form.
In this case however we do want to submit the form so we'll return true and that does the same job as
before but it doesn't have the problem of having to click twice.
So just to check we still get the validation.
But when we enter everything correctly it works fast quick.
So I'd recommend doing things that way rather than using the unbinding and submit method.
All right onto the weather scraper.